# useMemo for expensive calculations

## Background

React hooks are amazing. Being able to put all the logic and state management
within a function component (the "render method" equivalent for a class) allows
for mind blowing composability.

This power comes with an unfortunate limitation that calculations performed
within render will be performed every single render, regardless of whether the
inputs for the calculations change. For example:

```jsx
function Distance({x, y}) {
  const distance = calculateDistance(x, y)
  return (
    <div>
      The distance between {x} and {y} is {distance}.
    </div>
  )
}
```

If that component's parent re-renders, or if we add some unrelated state to the
component and trigger a re-render, we'll be calling `calculateDistance` every
render which could lead to a performance bottleneck.

This is why we have the `useMemo` hook from React:

```jsx
function Distance({x, y}) {
  const distance = React.useMemo(() => calculateDistance(x, y), [x, y])
  return (
    <div>
      The distance between {x} and {y} is {distance}.
    </div>
  )
}
```

This allows us to put that calculation behind a function which is only called
when the result actually needs to be re-evaluated (when the dependencies
change). In the example above the array `[x, y]` are called "dependencies" and
React knows that so long as those do not change, the result of our function will
be the same as the last time the function was called.

`useMemo` (and its sibling `useCallback`) is nuanced and should not be applied
in all cases. Read more about this in
[When to useMemo and useCallback](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/usememo-and-usecallback)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/02.js)
- [Final](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.js)

We have a `Menu` component that's calling a `getItems` function every render.
This function is really slow because it's attempting to sort thousands of items
based on the user's filter input.

Your job is to improve performance by wrapping `getItems` in `React.useMemo`.

To observe the performance problem with `getItems`, open the Chrome DevTools
"Performance" tab, click the settings gear and set CPU from "no throttling" to
"6x slowdown." Then select any item from the dropdown. Next, click the "Record"
circle icon in the devtools to start a recording. Then click on "force rerender"
and then click the "Record" circle again to stop the recording. You'll notice
that `getItems` was called when it should not have been (and it took a LONG time
to run). Your goal is to make it so `getItems` is only called when the filter
changes.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 React Production Mode

[Production deploy](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-1.js)

When doing this kind of profile measuring (to determine how slow something
really is), it's very important that you make sure that the code you're
profiling is the same code your users will run. React has a LOT of stuff it does
in development mode to make your development experience good, but that slows
down React considerably.

So for this, you'll need to run the app in production mode. To do this, you need
to run:

```
npm run build
npm run serve
```

Then open up the app on the port it shows (will probably be
http://localhost:5000, and it'll also likely be copied to your clipboard). Then
run all your profiling on that. Compare it to before. MUCH faster right!?

### 2. 💯 Put getItems into a Web Worker

[Production deploy](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-2.js)

> Warning, this one's _really_ cool, but kinda tricky... Also, the intent isn't
> necessarily for you to learn web workers, but just to expose you to a good use
> case for them. You can get started learning about web workers here:
> https://kentcdodds.com/blog/speed-up-your-app-with-web-workers

It's awesome that we reduced how often we have to call `getItems`,
unfortunately, on low-powered devices, `getItems` is still quite slow when it
actually _does_ need to run and we'd like to speed it up. So the product manager
👨‍💼 decided that we need to ditch `match-sorter` in favor of a simple string
`includes` because the experience is not fast enough (even though `match-sorter`
does provide a much superior UX). "No!" You argue. "We must have the better UX!"
There may be ways to optimize `match-sorter` itself, but let's try throwing this
all into a web worker instead...

Since you've got some extra time, update the import from
`import {getItems} from '../filter-cities'` to
`import {getItems} from '../workerized-filter-cities'` and then you need to
handle the fact that getItems is asynchronous. (💰 You don't need to make many
changes, and _all_ of your changes will be in your exercise file).

Because working with web workers is asynchronous, you'll probably want to use
the `useAsync` utility found in `src/utils.js` (💰 take a peak. It has an
example for how to use it).

Note also: For this one, to really get a sense of the performance improvements,
you'll want to run the DevTools profiler on the production build of the app. Run
`npm run build` and `npm run serve`. Remember that you'll need to rerun the
build every time you make a change.

## 🦉 Elaboration and Feedback

<div>
<span>After the instruction, if you want to remember what you've just learned, then </span>
<a rel="noopener noreferrer" target="_blank" href="https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Performance%20%E2%9A%A1&e=02%3A%20useMemo%20for%20expensive%20calculations&em=">
  fill out the elaboration and feedback form.
</a>
</div>
