# Optimize context value

## Background

The way that context works is that whenever the provided value changes from one
render to another, it triggers a re-render of all the consuming components
(which will re-render whether or not they're memoized).

So take this for example:

```jsx
const CountContext = React.createContext()

function CountProvider(props) {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const value = [count, setCount]
  return <CountContext.Provider value={value} {...props} />
}
```

Every time the `<CountProvider />` is re-rendered, the `value` is brand new, so
even though the `count` value itself may stay the same, all component consumers
will be re-rendered.

This can be problematic in certain scenarios. You can
[read more about this here](https://github.com/kentcdodds/kentcdodds.com/blob/319db97260078ea4c263e75166f05e2cea21ccd1/content/blog/how-to-optimize-your-context-value/index.md).

The quick and easy solution to this problem is to memoize the value that you
provide to the context provider:

```jsx
const CountContext = React.createContext()

function CountProvider(props) {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const value = React.useMemo(() => [count, setCount], [count])
  return <CountContext.Provider value={value} {...props} />
}
```

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/05.js)
- [Final](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/05.js)

This exercise is a bit contrived to make it simpler for you. Some apps do have
data grids like this and those can definitely suffer from these performance
problems, but you can also imagine that each square in this app is an individual
component in your app that's connected to the global store (either directly or
via its parent's connection to the store).

Our 👨‍💼 product manager noticed a performance problem. Whenever you click on the
"force render" button, the click is slow. What's frustrating about this is we've
applied `React.memo` to all our expensive components so it's confusing why that
update is slow when none of the components should really be re-rendering. See if
you can figure out why and fix that by memoizing the context value.

Make sure to profile before/after to see whether you actually fixed the problem.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 separate the contexts

[Production deploy](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/05.extra-1.js)

After we fixed that performance problem with our app, the 👨‍💼 product manager was
so happy because now he's confident we can fix this next performance problem.
When you click one of the cells, it updates that individual cell. But the Grid
itself is re-rendering as well!

The reason this is happening is because the `Grid` consumes the the provider
value and when the state changes, that triggers a re-render of all consumers.
But wait... the `Grid` doesn't really depend on the part of the value that's
changing, right? It only needs the `dispatch` function. So what if we put the
`state` in one context provider and the `dispatch` function in another context
provider? Hmm.... Give that a try and see if you can get things to run faster.

## 🦉 Elaboration and Feedback

<div>
<span>After the instruction, if you want to remember what you've just learned, then </span>
<a rel="noopener noreferrer" target="_blank" href="https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Performance%20%E2%9A%A1&e=05%3A%20Optimize%20context%20value&em=">
  fill out the elaboration and feedback form.
</a>
</div>
