# Fix "perf death by a thousand cuts"

## 📝 Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/06.md`

## Background

When you're building a sizable real-world application, you're typically going to
need some sort of state management solution. Whatever state management solution
you're using, often you can run into a problem that I call "perf death by a
thousand cuts" which basically means that so many components are updated when
state changes that it becomes a performance bottleneck.

Sometimes performance problems are because a single component is doing something
it shouldn't (running too much code on an interaction). Those are typically
easier to deal with because you can quickly identify the problem and determine a
good solution.

Perf death by a thousand cuts on the other hand doesn't give you an obvious
place to fix the performance problem because none of the components are slow in
isolation, the problem comes when lots of components need to run when there's a
state update.

So how do we fix this performance problem? Remember that every perf problem is
solved by less code. In this case, the perf problem is coming from running too
much code. Often you have components responding to a state change that don't
need to. Often we memoize these with `React.memo`, and we could do that to all
the components in our app, but there are two problems with this:

1. It increases the complexity of our app (because we have to start using
   `useCallback` and `useMemo` for literally everything to take advantage of
   that, meaning you have a bunch of dependency arrays to manage).
2. React's still doing a bunch of work to check whether these components should
   be re-rendered.

So how do we fix this? What if we just put less of our state in the global
store? This is called colocation and it's a really great way to both improve
performance and maintenance of our app at the same time.

For more on this, you can read my blog post
[State Colocation will make your React app faster](https://kcd.im/colocate-state).

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/06.js)
- [Final](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/06.js)

👨‍💼 The product manager has heard complaints from users that typing in the
`<DogNameInput />` is extremely slow, especially on low-end devices and when
there are lots of elements in the data grid.

We've already memoized the `<Grid />` and `<Cell />` components, but it's still
slow. So there's still too much code running on every keystroke as the user
types into the `<DogNameInput />`. As it turns out, the state that the
`<DogNameInput />` is using is only needed by the `<DogNameInput />` and we can
colocate that state. So let's go ahead and take that state out of the global
context and put it within the `<DogNameInput />` component.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 separate contexts

[Production deploy](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/06.extra-1.js)

Let's say that the state in the `<DogNameInput />` _does_ need to be global
because it's accessed by many components in the app. So what do we do? Well,
another way to solve this is by separating our app's state logically into
domain-specific context providers. So we can put the state for the dog input and
the state for the rest of our app in different context providers and when the
dog input updates, the grid doesn't need to update.

So for this extra credit, try to make that work. You may find it easier to just
undo all your work so far and start over from scratch to implement this.

### 2. 💯 limit the work consuming components do

[Production deploy](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/06.extra-2.js)

If you open up the React DevTools Profiler and click one of the cells then
you'll notice that all the `Cell`s are re-rendering but only the one that was
clicked will actually get a state update. The re-render was completely
unnecessary.

An alternative solution is to limit the amount of work consuming components have
to do and make it easier to determine whether a component needs to update.
Conceptually, each `Cell` in our example represents a different component you
may have in your application. Each of those components only cares about a slice
of the state and not all of it. Unfortunately, even though we're memoizing the
component itself with `React.memo`, whenever we have a state update, each
consumer needs to re-render so it can determine whether the state update was
something that matters to it.

So what if we make the `Cell` actually accept a `cell` prop and then put a
middle-man component in there that does the actual consuming of `useAppState()`.
We could rename the `Cell` component to `CellImpl` (Impl is short for
"implementation"). And then the "middle-man" component could be called `Cell`
(which is the one that we actually expose for use). That way if there's a state
update, `Cell` is re-rendered, and it forwards the `cell` to `CellImpl` which is
memoized and will therefore only re-render when `cell` changes.

Be sure to double-check the experience and make sure your changes are actually
improving the situation. Sometimes this will help, and other times it doesn't do
much to help and only leaves you with a more complex codebase for no reason!

### 3. 💯 write an HOC to get a slice of app state

[Production deploy](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/06.extra-3.js)

The previous extra credit could be made more generic via a Higher Order
Component. If you make it this far, try to write a higher order component (I
called it `withStateSlice`) to make it easier for us to do the previous
optimization in more places.

> NOTE: this is effectively what react-redux's `connect` higher order component
> does.

### 4. 💯 Use recoil

[Production deploy](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/06.extra-4.js)

All of this code optimization is fun and stuff, but honestly I'm not a big fan
of applying these optimizations all over the place. To be clear, situations
where you need to apply these optimizations are rare (I've written many
applications which didn't make use of `React.memo` or `React.PureComponent` at
all). However, there are definitely use cases where these optimizations just
aren't enough.

There's a great solution for these kinds of cases and it's perfect for what
we're trying to do. It's called [recoil](https://recoiljs.org/).

This whole time we've been pretending that each `Cell` actually represented a
completely different component in our application that was consuming the same
context. The optimizations we've done so far would normally be more than enough
for this kind of scenario. But I'll bet you're wondering how we could make the
grid faster as it is: a grid of random numbers.

For this extra credit, we're going all the way back to our original
implementation of this grid and we're going to apply a completely different
solution. This is a little bit more tricky, so we've got a special exercise file
to get you started. You'll want to open up `src/exercise/06.extra-4.js` and work
in that file.
[Here's the isolated page for that file](http://localhost:3000/isolated/exercise/06.extra-4.js).

The point of this exercise isn't necessarily for you to learn recoil, so Marty
💰 has helped you out with a bit of code for it. The point is to teach you
what's possible with recoil and the kinds of problems it's well suited for so
you know when to reach for it in your own applications (definitely don't use it
for everything). So spend a lot of your time in the DevTools and compare
before/after.

Here's a quick example of how to use the parts of recoil that you'll need to
know:

```javascript
const initialElements = {
  123: 456,
}
const elementPositionStateFamily = atomFamily({
  key: 'ElementPosition',
  default: ({elementId}) => initialElements[elementId],
})

function ElementListItem({elementId}) {
  const [position, setPosition] = useRecoilState(
    elementPositionStateFamily({elementId}),
  )
  const handleClick = () =>
    setPosition(previousPosition => previousPosition + 10)
  return (
    <div>
      Element: {elementId}
      Position: {position}
      <button onClick={handleClick}>Change Position</button>
    </div>
  )
}

function App() {
  return (
    <RecoilRoot>
      <ElementListItem elementId="123" />
    </RecoilRoot>
  )
}
```

📜 Learn more about Recoil from [the docs](https://recoiljs.org/).

Oh, and here's the production deploy of the start of this extra credit:
[exercise/06.extra-4.js](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/06.extra-4.js).
You can use that to compare to
[the production version of the finished version](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/06.extra-4.js).

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Performance%20%E2%9A%A1&e=06%3A%20Fix%20%22perf%20death%20by%20a%20thousand%20cuts%22&em=).
