# Production performance monitoring

## 📝 Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/07.md`

## Background

We should always ship fast experiences to our users, but sometimes something
slips through our PR review process and our users start having a slow
experience. Unless they complain to us, we have no way of knowing that things
are going so slow for them. User complaints is not a great policy for quality
control.

Because we can't make every user install the React DevTools and profile the app
for us as they interact with it, it would be nice if we could somehow track some
of the render times and get that information sent to our servers for us to
monitor.

Well, the React team has created an API specifically for this. It doesn't give
us quite as much information as the React DevTools do, but it does give us some
useful information.

📜 Read up on the capabilities of the `<React.Profiler />` component here:
https://reactjs.org/docs/profiler.html

Here's a basic usage example:

```jsx
<App>
  <Profiler id="Navigation" onRender={onRenderCallback}>
    <Navigation {...props} />
  </Profiler>
  <Main {...props} />
</App>
```

The callback is called with the following arguments

```javascript
function onRenderCallback(
  id, // the "id" prop of the Profiler tree that has just committed
  phase, // either "mount" (if the tree just mounted) or "update" (if it re-rendered)
  actualDuration, // time spent rendering the committed update
  baseDuration, // estimated time to render the entire subtree without memoization
  startTime, // when React began rendering this update
  commitTime, // when React committed this update
  interactions, // the Set of interactions belonging to this update
) {
  // Aggregate or log render timings...
}
```

**It's important to note** that unless you build your app using
`react-dom/profiling` and `scheduler/tracing-profiling` this component won't do
anything.

I've written about production performance monitoring in my post:
["React Production Performance Monitoring"](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/react-production-performance-monitoring)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/07.js)
- [Final](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/07.js)

We've got a `src/report-profile.js` file which you can pass to the `onRender`
function and it sends an aggregated report to our "reporting service" every 5
seconds. You can review the code and read the comments to get a clear picture of
what it does.

Our 👨‍💼 product manager isn't certain that we can keep a part of our app fast and
wants to install monitoring for it. So your job is to add performance
monitoring.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 use the experimental trace API

[Production deploy](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/07.extra-1.js)

This API was removed from React, so we've deleted the video and exercise from
this workshop. Learn more: https://github.com/facebook/react/issues/21285

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Performance%20%E2%9A%A1&e=07%3A%20Production%20performance%20monitoring&em=).
